-For the Armor,

Say the Piece of armor you're wearing is Plate, and you have 0 Skill with it. The piece of armor you're wearing has 10 Defense. 
The Defense is simply lowered down to 5 because of the penalties. (If the number for Defense/Damage isn't a whole number it's always rounded down,
 not up, even if it were 6.999, it would be 6.) So if you had 1 Skill in Plate, the Defense would be 7. Only defense is lowered.

As for the Bonuses, they are a little on the random side depending on the item/spell, but almost all of the time it's along the lines of a 
10%-20%-25% Damage/Defense Bonus or Mana Cost Reduction. For 3-4-5.

Also, despite the "Also make sure you take your Race's Skill bonuses into account when you fill these out, if your Race has +1 Unarmed Combat, 
and you put 5 points in Unarmed combat, Unarmed combat will not be raised to 6, it will still be at 5. Your race's bonus will just 
become unused." Part, It is possible to get to 6 with skills by the way, you just can't start out like that or reach it with racial bonuses.
 That skill level is reachable through training (Although it still isn't easy to get.) In that case it would be about 40% Damage/Defense/Mana.

 -spell: name, skill, base damage range, bHealing, base mana cost, custom effect

 -stat/damage RANGES (for spells and OnUse effects)? maybe even formula based?

 -formula bars... basically text boxes, maybe with different BG colour to make em stand out.
  | -> signifies range
  STR, AGI, INT, WIL, END -> player stats
  LVL -> level
  (MAX_){ENERGY, HP, MANA}, (MIN_){MELEE, RANGED}, MAGIC, DEF -> ratings
  SKILL:skillname; -> player skill, eg SKILL:Unarmed Combat; would evaluate to the player's damage+ with unarmed combat skill
  ??t prefix - the target's value. Eg: tLVL -> target's level, tINT -> target intellect??

  -skills: +Damage with skills, not +skills
  -The difference between Skills and +Damage with Skill is strictly internal. It is only ever seen during battle and on item/spell descs.

  BATTLES

  After pressing 'battles' on main, new window "Battles" appears.

  Battles window contains 2 buttons, 'load battle' or 'new battle', above load battle is a drop down list of saved battles,
  above new battle is a textbox for battle name.

  Then a new window, 'Battle: <Name>' appears. Two main columns appear on the screen: Team A, Team B. Each column will have "Add Member" on it.

  Upon clicking add member, a context menu will appear for either "player" or "NPC".

  If player, then they will be prompted to choose a player from a drop down list, then that player is added to the respective column, given
  an ID based on their position in said column, and a new PlayerObject is created, which will basically load all battle vars in an easy to access
  way based on the player proto. This includes iterating over all items and extracting stats, adjusting armor accounting for skills, etc.

  Else if NPC, a basic stats window will appear, requiring input of Name, Level and Cur/Max Health.

  Each Member, when in the column, will have a small 'Attack' button.

  When Attack button is pressed, If NPC, user will be prompted to enter a: short description of the attack (past tense), a damage range
  (aka a formula input box where only | is allowed), and a target from other team (or random, or none).

  Else If it was a player, a new window with a list of options is generated. Each one has a radio button. Options should include:
  Melee attack, [Ranged Attack,] Block, Any spells, Any usable items, Leave combat, or Pass.

  Block: -50% damage reduction per consecutive block. (100-50-0)

  Leave combat is dying with different event text.

  Once an attack option is set, a little tick should appear or something, to indicate done. Maybe red border. <Save here>

  Additionally, there is a 'Custom Event' button, which allows some arbitrary text to be written AFTER all automated content. All data of
  members can be manually edited, too. If an item/spell is used on an NPC who can't be affected by its effects (eg mana lowering item)
  it won't do anything internally but will still say it did.

  Once every attack is entered, the "Next Turn & Generate Post" button will be active. This will pop up a window with a forum formatted log
  of what happened during the turn. This will be kept in the turn log. <Save here>

  All Members will be updated with what happened during said turn. Battle ends when one team is dead.

  Next: next turn and generate post

  Players always go first. Player with highest agility goes first. NPCs go in random order.

  Effects:
  need objects that track what they do to player stats
  need to load from DB too
  apply/remove methods to affect the player appropriately